Southeast Asia—political snapshots
Angela Clare, Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security

Key issue
Southeast Asia is a global hotspot for US-China rivalries. Like many other countries in the region, Australia has much at stake in this contest. It must try to balance stability and security on the one hand, and its economic interests on the other. A deeper understanding of countries in the region is critical to this challenge.
The following provides a snapshot of the region’s current political landscape.

Indonesia
The April 2019 presidential election saw a re-run of the 2014 contest between current President Joko Widodo (Jokowi) and Prabowo Subianto. Both candidates offered versions of populist politics, with Jokowi’s inclusive or ‘technocratic’ approach contrasting with Prabowo’s more nationalist and confrontational politics. The result was a comfortable victory for the incumbent, with a greater than ten point margin nationally. High voter turnout—estimated to be 80 per cent of all eligible voters, or ten per cent higher than 2014—including a high turnout of millennials (the 17–34 age group), is thought to have been decisive in Jokowi’s victory.

Jokowi’s first term saw some successes in terms of advancing infrastructure, health and education, but progress in other areas, including economic growth, has been slow. But observers believe that Jokowi’s final term is unlikely to see significant progress on much-needed economic, legal, and political reforms, with populist politics too often standing in the way. Given the popularity of Indonesia’s economic nationalism, some note that the country will be faced with a dilemma: it needs to embrace China if it wishes to fund infrastructure, but becoming too indebted to China also presents risks.

Australian commentators believe that a Jokowi presidency should result in greater openness to trade, and brighter prospects for securing Australia’s bilateral trade agreement (IA-CEPA) through the Indonesian parliament. It also provides welcome continuity in defence and security cooperation in the region, analysts argue.  

Indonesia is the world’s third largest democracy and considered to be one of the most successful in Southeast Asia. But observers argue that this strength is increasingly found in fair and free elections rather than the advance of substantive democratic principles. Human rights, the rule of the law and the protection of minorities have all deteriorated under President Widowo’s watch, disappointing many of his civil society supporters. 

The elections saw a rise in sectarianism, and support for the two candidates split sharply along religious and provincial lines. Official results are expected to confirm ‘quick count’ findings that the more conservative Muslim provinces such as Aceh, West Sumatra and West Java showed the strongest support for Prabowo, while Central and East Java, Bali and West Timor—Jokowi’s home base and regions with larger non-Muslim populations—favoured the president.

While religion has always played an important role in Indonesian politics, there is little doubt that political figures are increasingly using Islam to mobilise support. Jokowi’s choice of vice presidential running mate, the conservative Islamic scholar Ma’ruf Amin, secured the support of one of the largest Muslim groups in the country, while Prabowo courted the orthodox Islamic vote. These choices served to draw religion more firmly to the centre of Indonesian politics. The Indonesian constitution confirms that the country is a religious state, and it is widely felt that non-Muslim candidates have little hope of serving as president.

Prabowo has alleged massive electoral fraud and has confirmed that he will challenge the official result in the Constitutional courts, as he did in 2014. As thousands of Prabowo’s supporters gathered in Jakarta to protest the official results on 21 May, violence resulted in a reported eight deaths and the country’s worst political unrest in two decades. Several terrorist plots have also been uncovered, as authorities believe extremists seek to exploit the situation to carry out attacks.

While these developments do not necessarily spell the decline of constitutional democracy in Indonesia, observers note that they do point to a need to rebuild social cohesion and pluralism.

Thailand
The March 2019 general election was the country’s first since the military coup of May 2014. The election was widely viewed as chaotic and lacking legitimacy, with results signalling the military’s ongoing grip on power.

Over the last few years the military has introduced a number of measures to increase the electoral chances of a pro-junta party, including the introduction of a new Thai Constitution that requires any subsequent government to follow the junta’s 20-year plan for the country. This requirement not only severely restricts any new government, but gives the military a justification to launch future coups.

Under the constitution a new 250-seat Senate, hand-picked by the junta, votes on who will be Prime Minister, giving the incumbent General Prayut Chan-ocha a signficant advantage. The pro-junta side starts out with the support of a third of the overall parliament, and needs just 126 more seats to elect their chosen Prime Minister. By contrast, an anti-junta alliance would have to win 376 out of the available 500 seats available in the House of Representatives to give them the same result.

Official election results announced on 9 May show that while opposition parties won the most seats in the elections (245), they are not likely to gain enough seats to be able to form government. Head of the junta and leader of the 2014 coup, Prayut Chan-ocha, is expected to retain his post as Prime Minister, despite his Phalang Praccharat party winning only 115 seats. However, any coalition it forms is unlikely to have the backing of half the House. Analysts believe that the anti-junta alliance, aggrieved at being deprived a mandate to govern, will make no effort to prevent legislative gridlock, paving the way for ineffectual government.

The results suggest that there is political will to end junta dominance, but that there is a long way to go before the country returns to genuine democracy. Even if an opposition group is allowed to govern, they will have to contend with a non-democratic constitution and the possibility of a junta leader as Prime Minister.

The US is no longer Thailand’s primary external partner. China is now Thailand’s largest trading partner, and Japan its largest foreign investor. There is little prospect that the US will regain its former status, including in defence cooperation, traditionally the two nations’ strongest link.

Cambodia
The authoritarian government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, who has held power for over 30 years, dominates broadcast media and has drafted a law to criminalise online criticism and step up surveillance. Hun Sen was returned to power in July 2018 elections after banning the main opposition party and arresting its leader on treason charges. With the military and police openly campaigning for the ruling party, the Government also increased its control of media, closing several independent radio stations and newspapers. All 125 lawmakers in the National Assembly, belong to Hun Sen’s Cambodian People’s Party (CPP).

In December 2018 the Cambodian parliament amended the law to allow banned politicians to petition the government for a return to politics, potentially allowing the 18 banned members of the Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), dissolved in November 2017, to resume political activity, without re-establishing the party. Analysts suggest that the Prime Minister’s intent may have been to further divide the domestic opposition, as well as provide a means to counter growing Western criticism of his repressive administration.

In a move that suggests Hun Sen is once again less interested in appeasing critics, the founder of the dissolved opposition party, Sam Rainsy, was sentenced in May 2019 in absentia for insulting the king and demoralising the armed forces. Analysts believe the opposition CNRP is likely to dissolve under Hun Sen’s pressure.

In response to what is seen as ‘the deterioration of democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of law’, the EU (Cambodia’s largest export destination) is reconsidering the country’s preferential access to European markets. The impact of this step on the poor and near-poor in Cambodia could be severe.

Prime Minister Hun Sen’s renewed clampdown on domestic opposition may be intended as a response to what he sees as external interference in Cambodia’s internal affairs. Separately, Hun Sen said that China would help Cambodia in the event it loses EU access. China has already promised US$588 million in aid to Cambodia from 2019–2021 and has become Cambodia’s largest donor. It is already Cambodia’s largest foreign investor.

Some link the retreat of domestic opposition to Hun Sen in part to inaction by the UN and the others to ensure a peaceful handover of power in 1993 after the CPP lost the popular vote, and later in 1997 in response to Hun Sen’s brutal coup. Recent events only confirm the view that Hun Sen remains a dominant force.

The Philippines
In what has been termed the Philippines’ ‘winner-takes-all’ electoral system, the President exercises significant power over budgets and appointments, while political parties and opposition forces are weak.

President Rodrigo Duterte won the 2016 election with a promise to restore the supremacy of law and bring down the entrenched elites. President Duterte’s allies easily won the May 2019 mid-term elections, paving the way for constitutional change and fewer checks on his controversial rule. Critics fear that constitutional change will allow an extension to the President’s tenure, due to end in 2022, the restoration of the death penalty, and an overall strengthening of his grip on power.

Debate over the country’s strategic alignment with China and the US has intensified, as the two powers jostle for regional influence. Philippine-US relations are on rocky ground, with questions over the future of the US strategic alliance. China’s state-backed investments in Philippine infrastructure have also raised concerns over debt and sovereignty. Duterte’s recent moves to strengthen ties with Japan are seen as an important stabilising step.

As his war on drugs continues, reports suggest that many innocents are among the more than 12,000 killed—allegedly by extrajudicial measures—including lawyers acting on behalf of drug suspects. In March 2019 Duterte announced that the Philippines would withdraw from the International Criminal Court (ICC) in response to the ICC’s launch of a preliminary examination of ‘drug war’ killings as part of its decision on whether to open a full investigation.

Human rights advocates argue that Duterte’s blatant support for violent methods since 2016 may have exacerbated the crisis in the southern region of Mindanao. Advocates argue that Duterte’s neglect of the Bangsamoro peace process promoted by his predecessor, Benigno Aquino, the extension of martial law in the region and the slow pace of rehabilitating the devastated city of Marawi, with an estimated 50,000 residents unable to return to their homes following the 2017 seige, has only served to strengthen extremists who believe the island will never get a fair deal from Manila.

Human rights abuses perpetrated by government forces against local activists in Mindanao, branded as communist insurgents, have also been reported. These groups are thought to include indigenous activists protesting against resource extraction and military encroachment on ancestral lands.

Malaysia
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad came to office in May 2018 aged 93, following a surprising but decisive victory for his Pakatan Harapan (Alliance of Hope) coalition, against the party which had led the country for more than 60 years—the corruption-ridden Barisan Nasional (Malay) coalition led by former Prime Minister Najib Razak.

The country’s first transfer of power since independence in 1957 generated a good deal of optimism. Mahathir campaigned on a platform of good governance, pledging to roll back controls on political life and increase transparency. The coalition attracted strong support from minority ethnic Chinese and Indian communities, estimated to comprise 30 per cent of the population.

But having promised a large number of economic and financial reforms in the lead-up to the election, the veteran politician admitted the coalition did not expect to win and had made too many promises.

Ethnic and religious tensions between the Muslim-Malay majority and the Chinese-Malay minority, a central feature of Malaysian politics, have also come to the fore. These tensions are being exploited by the Malay opposition to block reforms and sway the majority vote. The Government’s backtracking on promises to repeal oppressive laws—continuing to use the draconian Sedition Act, for instance—and sign a series of UN conventions is widely seen as an attempt to shore up its pro-Malay credentials in the face of weakening popular support.

After one year in office the new government’s approval rating is reported to have fallen from 79 to 39 per cent. Political challenges are matched on the economic front, with foreign investors reluctant to move in and the cost of living remaining high. Some welcome institutional reforms have been achieved, however, including strengthening the Anti-Corruption Commission.

Malaysia signed up to some high-profile infrastructure deals under China’s Belt and Road Initiative, but ties with China have become strained over the suspension of two of its largest Chinese-backed projects, the $19 billion East Coast Rail Link (ECRL) in 2017, and the US$34 billion Bandar Malaysia development in Kuala Lumpur in 2018. Mahathir has not been afraid to criticise the deals, citing unequal and unfavourable terms. Both projects have since been revived, signalling strengthening relations between the two countries.

Mahathir promised that he would hand over power within two years to Anwar Ibrahim, his former political opponent turned ally. Anwar, who has twice been jailed on politically motivated sodomy charges (during the reigns of Mahathir and Najib), remains fearful that Mahathir might go back on his word.

Myanmar
After decades of economic and political isolation under military rule, in 2011 Myanmar began a transition to a hybrid system of government. The military continues to hold significant control of government, but an opening up of the media, a growing civil society and competitive elections have allowed for wider participation in political life and the country’s development agenda.

But while the formation of a new government in 2015 was an important step in the country’s transition to more inclusive government, for many people life remains little changed, if not worse. Myanmar’s economy is increasingly troubled, with slowing activity across almost all measures. Key economic, social and political reforms are stalled, multiple conflicts persist along border regions, and longstanding issues of citizenship remain unresolved.

International enthusiasm for Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy party in 2015 has waned as hopes fade that Suu Kyi, as State Counsellor, would deal more strongly with the Rohingya crisis. Her government remains bound to the military and she continues to respond with what some see as indifference to the issue.

Myanmar’s military still controls a quarter of the seats, three critical ministries—home affairs, defence and border affairs—and has a constitutional role as the leading body in national governance in parliament. It is also seen to be the real power in northern Rakhine state and along the border with Bangladesh. Both the military and the country’s Burmese ethnic majority overwhelmingly support the military’s actions against the Rohingya.

The international community remains reluctant to reimpose sanctions and risk reinforcing Myanmar’s dependence on China. The release of two Reuters journalists in May 2019, who had been detained in late 2017 while covering UN reports of genocide against the Rohingya, was arguably a rare concession to international pressure. The journalists were awarded Pulitzer prizes for their work on the crisis, and their imprisonment on questionable charges has been a sticking point for much of the global community. The question of how to hold Myanmar to account for its actions against the Rohingya remains unanswered.

China remains Myanmar’s primary political, military and economic partner. The two countries have signed several agreements under the Belt and Road Initiative, including the high profile China-Myanmar Economic Corridor. In return for Myanmar’s cooperation, Beijing has provided economic assistance and political support to the Myanmar Government over the Rohingya crisis and the peace process in northern Myanmar.

Vietnam
Vietnam has been the most rapidly growing economy in Southeast Asia for more than a decade, and has made remarkable inroads against poverty over the past 30 years. Political liberalisation and tolerance of dissidents have made little progress, however, and the country’s one-party state remains secure.

Politically speaking, a number of factors are seen to be shaping its direction, including an anti-corruption crackdown in response to ‘catastrophic’ levels of fraud, resulting in charges against a number of high-profile officials and businessmen.

Massive anti-China demonstrations in 2018 have also shaken authorities. The protests were triggered by a government proposal to create ‘special economic zones’ that would have potentially granted Chinese businesses land rights of up to 100 years (allowing the Government to arbitrarily reallocate land to ‘well-connected businesses’). Chinese activities in the South China Sea, environmental concerns, labour rights, constitutional entitlements and the loss of internet freedom have also sparked anger.

Observers note that Vietnam’s human rights situation continues to deteriorate, as authorities imprisoned a range of civil society activists in relation to the protests.

Vietnam is at the centre of tensions over China’s growing assertiveness in the region. One of the principal claimants in the South China Sea disputes, Vietnam is committed to establishing a Code of Conduct ‘with teeth’, that is, one that is legally binding and provides dispute management mechanisms.

Commentators note that the US has become one of Vietnam’s most important economic and political partners in recent decades, while at the same time striving to ‘accommodate the giant next door’. Vietnam’s ability to balance its relations with the two powers has given it diplomatic and strategic weight.

In March 2019 Australia and Vietnam signed a Joint Statement on the Establishment of a Strategic Partnership. The Partnership elevates the bilateral relationship, pledging commitment to working ‘… intensively to ensure that our region remains peaceful, resilient and shaped by the rules and norms that have prevailed for decades’.

Lao PDR
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is one of the world’s few remaining communist states, and one of the poorest in the region with 23.2 per cent of the population living below the poverty line. Economic reforms have seen it become one of the fastest growing countries in Southeast Asia; but the country faces a number of obstacles to growth, including an economy heavily dependent on natural resource exports—making it vulnerable to shocks—and the increased costs associated with being a landlocked country. The country remains heavily dependent on foreign aid.

Laos is heavily dependent on Chinese loans to meet its infrastructure needs, and is investing in a number of large infrastructure projects to improve its connectivity, including rail links to China and the rest of ASEAN, and a series of large hydropower projects. Neighbours Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand are concerned about the environmental impact of its dam building along the Mekong River. Aid groups have raised concerns about construction standards and the safety of local communities, as seen in the collapse of the Xe-Pian Xe-Namnoy dam in 2018. Both Thailand and China are jointly investing in Lao’s estimated 11 dam projects along the lower Mekong, with the aim of purchasing energy from these projects.

Further reading
C Hill, Defence cooperation with Myanmar—Australia and other countries: a quick guide, Research paper series, 2017–18, Parliamentary Library, Canberra, 13 October 2017.

C Hill, ‘Authoritarianism ascendant: Cambodia’s politics and Australia’s dilemmas’, FlagPost, Parliamentary Library blog, 14 September 2017.
 

Back to Parliamentary Library Briefing Book

For copyright reasons some linked items are only available to members of Parliament.

PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
358
Muneeroh Yeedum
Special Issue, 2015, pp. 358-368
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTHEAST ASIA: 
THE REFLECTION OF “FREEDOM IN THE WORLD” INDEX
BY FREEDOM HOUSE ORGANIZATION
Maneroo Yeedum
Lecturer, Public Administration Program, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
Phranakhon Si AyutthayaRaja hat University, Phranakhon Si Ayutthaya, Thailand, 
sandmuneeroh@gmail.com
Abstract
This research aims to understand and compare the significance of political development in 
Southeast Asia countries through democratic index, “Freedom in the World”, by Freedom 
House Organization. The study started with a consideration of “Freedom in the World” survey 
data from years cover 1972-2014 in 11 Southeast Asia countries. Then, explicated the 
substantial political phenomenon from the trends of data. The findings suggested that there are 
three clusters of political development in Southeast Asia. The First cluster is the countries which 
are designated to the one and only status every year of the Freedom House surveys: Burma, 
Vietnam, East Timor and Singapore. The Second cluster is the countries which are designated to 
two statuses in the periods of the Freedom House surveys: Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia 
and the Philippines. The Third cluster is the countries which are designated to three statuses in 
the periods of the Freedom House surveys: Indonesia and Thailand.
Keywords
Political Development, Southeast Asia, Democracy, Freedom House Organization, Freedom In 
The World
1. Introduction 
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, a trend of 
democratization speedily spread to all parts of the world. Currently, democracy is the universal 
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
359
benchmark in the political society, as we can say we are now in the democratic age. However, 
we could not explicating democracy and democratization by evading the revision of political 
development.
To explain the political development patterns of South east Asia countries is probably an 
incredible task. Generally, we explain political development by concentrating on the history of 
political, culture, economic and social. (Croissant & Bünte, 2011). However, the question which 
the researcher ruminate on the political development study is “Can we explain the political 
development in other ways?” Consequently, the democracy surveys are the answer of my 
choices.
There are several institution and organization which are survey and measure the 
democracy of the countries. For examples, the Economist Intelligence Unit’s index of 
democracy, World Bank, Freedom House Organization; etc.
However, the reliability in longtime of survey from 1972 to present-day is a reason which 
the researchers designate to study of the Freedom House Organization survey, especially, 
‘Freedom in the World’ annual surveys. 
In studies on democracy, democratization and political development, the Freedom in the 
world index by Freedom House Organization is frequently used to measure the concept of 
democracy. Especially, the evaluating in the narrow concept of democracy, that of ‘electoral 
democracy’
The Freedom house Organization is the American organization that was founded in 
1941.The annual “Freedom in the World” survey, launched by the Freedom House Organization 
in 1973 edition which is covered the world situations in 1972. The purpose of the “Freedom in 
the World” survey is to designate the democracy status in the countries all parts of the world, like 
a democracy watchdog.
The survey stared to considerate two parts of measurement; political rights and civil 
liberties. The political rights (PR) are measured on 1-7 scale similarly to the civil liberties (CL). 
The highest degree of freedom is one while seven the lowest. 
The combined average score for political rights and civil liberties is designated to the 
democracy status of the countries. The status represented the freedom status in each country. 
There are three statuses; Free, Partly free and Not free.
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
360
“Free” (F) is the status that the countries whose combined average scores for political 
rights and civil liberties fell in range 1.0 to 2.5
“Partly free” (PF) is the status that the countries whose combined average scores for 
political rights and civil liberties fell in range 3.0 to 5.5. This scores was used until 2003 then 
from year 2003 survey is changed to 3.0 -5.0 until present.
“Not free” (NF) is the status that the countries whose combined average scores for 
political rights and civil liberties fell in range 5.5 to 7.0 (Freedom House Organization, 2015). 
Figure 1: Percentages of Free, Partly Free, and Not Free status 
in Southeast Asia Countries (1972 – 2014)
In the Most noticeably of all, it can be seen that the Figure 1 shows the graph of 
percentages of the freedom in the world status in Southeast Asia countries, years covered from 
1972 to 2014. There are significant trends of the “Free” status. In 1976-1986, 1991-1995 and 
2013-2014 periods, there are not Free Southeast Asia countries. These notable trends bring the 
researcher back to focusing on the details of annual index and survey data to understanding the 
significant of political development.
2. Objectives
This research purposes to compare and understand the significance of political 
development in Southeast Asia countries through annual democratic survey, “Freedom in the 
World”, by Freedom House Organization. Then, to arrange the clusters of political development 
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
361
of Southeast Asia countries that reflected from the “Freedom in the world” index by Freedom 
House Organization.
3. Method
In the effort to understand the political development in Southeast Asia countries, this 
research uses comparative approach to arrange data and explain the significant phenomenon. 
This research conducted by the analysis of “Freedom in the World”, by Freedom House 
Organization survey data. By focusing the “Freedom in the World” data in 1973 to 2015 editions 
which designated the phenomenon in years cover 1972 to 2014.
4. Results
4.1 OverReviewof Southeast Asia
By focusing and comparing of overall “Freedom in the World” survey data in 
years cover 1972 to 2014, the trends of Southeast Asia countries’ political development are 
exposed.
Figure 2: “Freedom in the World” Scores and Status in Southeast Asia Countries (1972 – 2014)
Source: Modified from the data by Freedom House Organization. (2015). Individual country 
ratings and status: Freedom in the World 1973-2015.
The Figure 2 shows the Southeast Asia countries’ scores and status of “Freedom in the 
World” index 1972 to 2014 which demonstrates the overview of democracy trends and political 
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
362
development. There are several summaries of Southeast Asia countries’ political developments 
of from the Figure 2. The first of all, the most of Southeast Asia countries are in the “Not Free” 
status. These trends display that the most of democratization is hardly effect in the region. On the 
other hand, the Southeast Asia countries are rarely designated as “Free” statuses. For examples, 
Thailand in 1975 is designated to “Free” status after the October 14, 1973 Student Uprising; the 
Philippines’ phenomenon in 1986 after The People Power Revolution, PPP Revolution, or the 
EDSA Revolution.
4.2 The political development clusters in Southeast Asia. 
By comparing and focusing country by country on the detail of “Freedom in the World”
index 1972 to 2014. The findings suggested that there are three clusters of political development 
in Southeast Asia countries. 
4.2.1The First Cluster Is The Countries Which Are Designated To The One And Only 
Status Every Year Of The Freedom House Surveys. 
This cluster could be divided to two sub-clusters; 
 The First sub-cluster is the Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and 
only “Not Free” status of the Freedom House surveys; Burma and Vietnam. 
 The second sub-cluster is the Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one 
and only “Partly Free” status of the Freedom House surveys; East Timor and Singapore.
Table 1: The Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and only “Not Free”
Status of the Freedom House surveys
Country Status Total Percentages Year(s) cover
Burma Not Free All of 42 100 % 1972-2014
Partly Free 0 of 42 0%
Free 0 of 42 0%
Vietnam Not Free All of 38 100% 1976-2014
Partly Free 0 of 38 0%
Free 0 of 38 0%
No survey data: 1972-1975
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
363
As shown in Table 1, the data of Burma and Vietnam which are The First sub-cluster is
the Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and only “Not Free” status of the 
Freedom House surveys. The overall of the political development of Burma is not democracy 
because of the rule by military government all the period of political situation. Similarly, the 
political regime in Vietnam is a socialist state and strongly roles by communist party.
Table 2: The Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and only “Partly Free”
Status of the Freedom House surveys
Country Status Total Percentages Year(s) cover
East 
Timor
Not Free 0 of 16 0%
Partly Free 16 of 16 100 % 1999-2014
Free 0 of 16 0%
No Data: 1972-1998
Singapore Not Free 0 of 42 0%
Partly Free All of 42 100% 1972-2014
Free 0 of 42 0%
As shown in Table 2, the second sub-cluster is the Southeast Asia countries which are 
designated to the one and only“ Partly Free” status of the Freedom House surveys; East Timor 
and Singapore. East Timor is the newly country in the region. The first survey of East Timor is 
2000 edition of ‘Freedom in the world’ which is covered in 1999 political situation. Because of 
the period of nation building and the problem of the governmental stability, East Timor is 
designated to the “Partly Free” status. 
By contrast, Singapore is the most strongly governmental and political stability in 
Southeast Asia but with the problems of the governing by the dominant and one single party, the 
People’s Action Party-PAP, and the freedom of expression problems. Some scholar named 
Singapore as “Compulsive Authoritarianism” regime. (Margoles, 2005; 95).As the reason of 
scarcely democratization in East Timor and Singapore, They are designated to the similar “Partly 
Free” status along the surveys although there is dissimilar political development. 
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
364
4.2.2 The second cluster is the countries which are designated to two statuses in the periods 
of the Freedom House surveys: 
Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia and the Philippines.
Table 3: The Southeast Asia countries which are designated to two statuses of 
the Freedom House surveys
Country Status Total Percentag
es
Year(s) cover
Brunei Not Free 33 of 
36
91.67% 1972 -
Nov.1984
Nov1988 - 2014
Partly 
Free
3 of 36 8.33% Nov.1984-Nov.1987
Free 0 of 36 0%
No Data: 1977-Nov 1983
Cambod
ia
Not Free 40 of 
42
95.24% 1972-1992 1995-2014
Partly 
Free
2 of 42 4.76% 1993-1994
Free 0 of 42 0%
Laos Not Free 39 of 
42
92.86% 1975-2014
Partly 
Free
3 of 42 7.14% 1972-1974
Free 0 of 42 0%
Malaysia Not Free 0 of 42 0%
Partly 
Free
40 of 
42
95.24% 1974-2014
Free 2 of 42 4.76% 1972-1973
Philippin
es
Not Free 0 of 42 0%
Partly 
Free
30 of 
42
71.43% 1972- Nov.1986 1990-
1995
2005-
2014
Free 12 of
42
28.57% Nov.1986-
Dec.1989
1996-
2004
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
365
As shown in Table 3, the generally Southeast Asia countries are designated to two 
statuses of the Freedom House surveys.
Brunei is the country which designated to “Not Free” status in 1972 to 1984 with the 
political situation of governs by British protectorate. However, in the early1984, because of the 
gaining of its independent from United Kingdom and the development of economics and society 
in Brunei, the status is raised to “Partly Free”. Conversely, with a strongly constitutional 
sultanate and the powerful of Islamic state and laws, Brunei is declined to “Not Free” status 
since 1988 to present.
The political development of Cambodia, beginning with the unstable politics with the 
conflicts between the government and military and the periods of “Khmer rouge regime” are the 
significant political situation conduct to the “Not Free” status for 20 years, since 1972 to 1992. 
However, the restoration of Cambodia’s monarchy by former King Norodom Sihanouk and the 
election in 1994 contributes to “Partly Free” status. Unfortunately, since 1995 until present is the 
period of “Not Free”. Especially, after the 1997 coup d’état by Hun Sen led to the dominated 
government which is no democracy.
Laos is designated to “Partly Free” status in 1972 to 1974. After that, since the socialist 
state proclaims in 1995 to the 2014 survey, Laos is designated to “Not Free”.
Malaysia’s political development is declined from “Free”, in 1972-1973, “Partly Free” 
since 1974. There are several situations which contributed to “Partly free” status of Freedom in 
the World survey: the national cultural policy in1970s, as “Bumiputra”, is the significant matter 
urges to the national conflicts; the political conflicts which related to national policy between 
Malay and Chinese; the political unstable; etc. These phenomenon leads to the political 
development’s reflection from the surveys.
The data from the “Freedom in the World” survey’s reflection, the Philippines is the most 
designated to “Free” status in Southeast Asia, 12 of 42 times of the surveys. The political 
development of the Philippines is started with “Partly Free” status with the postcolonial period, 
after the independence from America. The significant changing to “Free” status is related to the 
people uprising in 1986 and 2001. 
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
366
4.2.3 The Third Cluster Is The Countries Which Are Designated To Three Statuses In The 
Periods Of The Freedom House Surveys:
Indonesia and Thailand.
Table 4: The Southeast Asia countries which are designated to three statuses of 
the Freedom House surveys
Country Status Total Percentag
es
Year(s) cover
Indonesi
a
Not Free 5 of 42 11.90% 1993-
1997
Partly 
Free
29 of 
42
69.05% 1972-1992 1998-2004 2013-
2014
Free 8 of 42 19.05% 2005-2012
Thailan
d
Not Free 5 of 42 11.90%
1972
1976
-1977
2006
2014
Partly 
Free
27 of 
42
64.28%
1973
-1974
1978
-Nov 1988
1991
-1997
2005
2007
-2013
Free 10 of 
42
23.81%
1975
Nov 1988
-1990
1998-2004
As shown in Table 4, the data revealed that there are two significant countries which are 
designated to all status of Freedom in the World index. Indonesia is the unstable politics and 
government, similarly to Thailand.
Indonesia is started with “Partly Free” status for 20 years, since 1972 until 1992. The 
noteworthy situation of the 1967-1998 is the Suharto era. From the survey, Indonesia is 
designated to “Not Free” in 1993-1997 which the lately Suharto era. In this period, there are 
several situations: the corruption; the suppression of political opposition; the authoritarian order; 
etc. After that there are the people uprising in 1997 and the economical context, Tom Yam Kung 
Crisis, led Suharto resigned of the position in 1998. After the “Not Free” periods, it seems that 
Indonesia develops to the grater position to “Partly Free” in 1998-2004 and jumped to “Free” 
status in 2005 -2012. Althoughthe position slightly declined to “Partly Free” status in 2013 until
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
367
present, the new government is expected by the several democratic leaders and scholars to be the 
new role model of democracy in Southeast Asia. (Cochrane, 2014;the Economist, 2009)
Thailand is started with the “Not Free” status in 1972 as the result of the military regime. 
Then, the status of Thailand changed to “Partly Free” because of the 14 October 1973 Student 
uprising and jumped to “Free” status in 1975 after the used of 1974 democratic constitution. 
Unfortunately, the political development of Thailand dropped significantly with the 6 October 
1976 massacred in Thammasat University. After that, Thailand rose gradually to “Partly Free” in 
1978 -1988 and “Free” status in 1998-1990 for the reason of re-democratization. However, it 
seems like the political development of Thailand is unstable in long periods. There was hardly 
any change in long term. While the status in 1991-2005 are changed from “Partly Free” to “Free” 
and declined back to “Partly Free”, the political situation which depressed the democratic people 
in Thailand are the 2006 and 2014 coup d’états led Thailand to “Not Free” status of the Freedom 
in the World. These dramatic changings of democracy status reflect the unstable of democracy 
and Political development in Thailand.
5. Conclusion and Recommendation
The findings proposed that there are three clusters of political development in Southeast 
Asia which is reflected and explained through the Freedom in the World index by Freedom 
House Organization. 
The First cluster is the countries which are designated to the one and only status every 
year of the Freedom House surveys. This cluster could be divided to two sub-clusters; The First 
sub-cluster is the Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and only “Not Free”
status of the Freedom House surveys; Burma and Vietnam; The second sub-cluster is the 
Southeast Asia countries which are designated to the one and only “Partly Free” status of the 
Freedom House surveys; East Timor and Singapore.
The second cluster is the countries which are designated to two statuses in the periods of 
the Freedom House surveys: Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia and the Philippines.
The Third cluster is the countries which are designated to three statuses in the periods of 
the Freedom House surveys: Indonesia and Thailand.
PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences
ISSN 2454-5899
© 2015 The author and GRDS Publishing. All rights reserved.
Available Online at: http://grdspublishing.org/PEOPLE/people.html
368
There are the limitation and recommendation of this research. Firstly, this research is 
explained in comparative approach with the generally and principally political development in 
Southeast Asia countries, thus the limitation is hardly explain by focusing on specifically detail 
of countries’ contexts. Secondly, this research is especially focus on “Freedom in the World” 
index by Freedom House Organization. There are other democracy indicators, such as the 
Economist Intelligence Unit, which proper in the studies on democratization and political 
development.
REFERENCES
Croissant, Aurel and Marco Bünte (Ed). (2011). The Crisis of Democratic Governance 
inSoutheast Asia. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cochrane, J. (2014). In Southeast Asia, Indonesia Is an Unlikely Role Model for Democracy.The 
New York Times.Retrieved fromhttp://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/05/world/asia/insoutheast-asia-indonesia-becomes-a-role-model-fordemocracy.html? Rref=world/asia&_
r=1
Freedom House Organization.(1998-2015). Freedom in the World 1998 -2015.Freedom House 
Organization. Retrieved from https://freedomhouse.org/
Freedom House Organization.(2015). Individual country ratings and status; Freedom 
in the World 1973-2015.Freedom House Organization. Retrieved from 
https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/Individual%20Country%20Ratings%20and%
20Status%2C%201973-2015%20%28FINAL%29.xls
Margolin, J.-L. (2005). Singapore 40 years on: Slow road to democracy. Asia Europe Journal, 
3(1), 95–115.
The Indonesian surprise: The world’s biggest Muslim country has changed from authoritarian 
basket-case to regional role model. (2009, April 2).The Economist.Retrieved from 
http://www.economist.com/node/13413966

Understanding political influences
on Southeast Asia’s
development experience
Dwight Perkins
Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Abstract
Purpose – The per capita GDP of the countries of Southeast Asia (SEA) varies from less than $5,000 to over
$97,000. This paper aims to analyze the political factors behind such variation, such as wars, extreme politics,
political instability, and kleptocratic governments and leaders, and how they affect the development experience
within the region.
Design/methodology/approach – This paper uses the comparative political economy analysis approach to
make a comparison among SEA countries using knowledge from well-known political–economic history and
development data from World Development Indicators provided by World Bank.
Findings – A long period of political stability creates a favorable environment for investment that, in return,
stimulates sustained economic growth in SEA. The countries have all grown rapidly, but their experience of
development varies. The four countries that avoided political extremes (Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and
Brunei) have the highest per capita incomes today. Those that have had long periods of war and political
instability, but which have also had substantial periods of stability (Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines),
come next. Cambodia and Laos have suffered long periods of war and are the least developed. Myanmar’s
military rulers, through civil wars and kleptocratic mismanagement of the economy, have prevented growth
much of the time.
Originality/value – Most studies of Southeast Asian growth have analyzed the experience of single countries
and missed the central role played by extreme politics, including wars, to explain why some countries have
much higher per capita incomes than others. This paper is expected to fill this gap.
Keywords Southeast Asia, Economic growth, Extreme politics
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
The nations of Southeast Asia contain 661 million people (in 2019), or 8.6% of the world’s
population (World Bank, 2021). Indonesia alone is the world’s fourth-largest country in
terms of population, but outside the region, little attention has been paid to Southeast Asia’s
experience of economic development. This is to be regretted because the region shares many
of the historical characteristics of other parts of the developing world in ways that the much
better-known experience of Northeast Asia (Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and Taiwan and Hong
Kong in Greater China) does not. Except for Thailand, all the countries of Southeast Asia
were colonies of European powers, all were richer in natural resources than the resourcepoor nations of Northeast Asia, and, except for Vietnam, none had long traditions of welleducated elites. In addition, many Southeast Asian nations have diverse populations that
FREP
1,1
4
© Dwight Perkins. Published in Fulbright Review of Economics and Policy. Published by Emerald
Publishing Limited. This article is published under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0)
license. Anyone may reproduce, distribute, translate and create derivative works of this article (for both
commercial and non-commercial purposes), subject to full attribution to the original publication and
authors. The full terms of this license may be seen at http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0/
legalcode
The author thanks David Dapice and Malcolm McPherson for reading and suggesting changes and
additions that have improved this paper.
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/2635-0173.htm
Received 16 March 2021
Revised 5 May 2021
Accepted 21 May 2021
Fulbright Review of Economics
and Policy
Vol. 1 No. 1, 2021
pp. 4-20
Emerald Publishing Limited
e-ISSN: 2635-0181
p-ISSN: 2635-0173
DOI 10.1108/FREP-03-2021-0021
speak different languages. Japanese and Koreans, in contrast, mostly speak one respective
language; even China, with its enormous population, has a common written language used
by all who can read.
The first decades after the Second World War were painful for much of Southeast
Asia. In Indonesia, the Dutch first fought to hold on to their colony in the region, and
when they withdrew, independent Indonesia was led by a charismatic figure, President
Sukarno, who was more interested in playing a prominent role on the international
stage that included threatening war with Malaya when it incorporated parts of
northern Borneo to form Malaysia. At home, Sukarno tried to lead by maintaining a
balance between a vigorous communist movement and the national army, which ended
in the bloodbath of 1965. The French attempted to reassert control over Indochina.
Although this ended in 1954, it was followed by a civil war in Vietnam that also
engulfed Laos and Cambodia, got caught up in the Cold War, and lasted for two
decades. Although the British reestablished control over Malaya from the Japanese in
1945, they then fought a war (the “Emergency”) that involved mainly parts of the
Chinese population of the Malay Peninsula, delaying Malayan independence until 1957.
Independence was followed several years later by the incorporation of Singapore into
Malaysia, although it was then forced to withdraw and become a separate independent
country. Burma (Myanmar) gained independence from Britain peacefully in 1948 but
soon descended into civil wars involving its large minority populations. These have
still not been fully resolved at the time of publication (2021). The Philippines also
gained independence peacefully in 1946, but it soon fought a major communist
insurgency and then descended into two decades of misrule by Ferdinand Marcos that
left the economy in shambles.
I mention this well-known history simply to make the point that there was no economic
development to understand while these wars, mismanagement and struggles for
independence were underway. Using a comparative political economy approach, this
paper will focus first on the economic impact of these political events and then turn to what
happened after the wars and political struggles ended. As analysis will make clear later in this
paper, independence in many Southeast Asian countries did not automatically create a
supportive political environment for economic development.
Around the time that they achieved independence, most of the nations of Southeast Asia
were by no means among the poorest countries in the world, even if one excludes Brunei,
with its tiny population and great oil wealth, and Singapore, the dominant port city in the
region (Table 1). Indeed, by 1960, most of the other countries of Southeast Asia were
significantly richer per capita than India or China. Myanmar was the notable exception,
however, if the data are roughly accurate. The data for Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos are for
the 1980s, but it is likely that if an estimate for 1960 were available, per capita incomes in the
three countries would have been similar or even a bit higher than later, after long years
of war.
In addition, all the countries of Southeast Asia apart from Myanmar had higher per
capita incomes than the Republic of Korea in 1960, just before it began its accelerated growth
spurt. At that time, Malaya and the Philippines had per capita GDPs more than double that
of Korea (Shah, 2017). By 2019, in contrast, Korea’s per capita GDP was higher than the
highest Southeast Asian economy, if one excludes Brunei and Singapore. Malaysia in 2019
remained by far the richest country after Singapore, Thailand had risen to third place and
the Philippines had fallen to fourth place, only slightly ahead of Vietnam and Laos.
Myanmar had risen above Indonesia and Cambodia, if the figures can be believed since its
economic data are suspect. The remainder of this paper will attempt to explain why the
pattern just described occurred.
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
5
Economic growth is incompatible with many kinds of politics
To explain the patterns of economic growth in Southeast Asia, why some countries did
better than others, and why some did well for a time and then performed poorly, one needs
to begin with the politics. Politics have typically been left out of regression equations used
to explain growth, although there are notable exceptions (Alesina et al., 1996). In contrast,
a recent influential study argued that sustained economic growth is only likely if a country
moves toward the active participation of its population in the political process – or, in
slightly oversimplified terms, moves from authoritarian to more democratic forms of
governance (Robinson and Acemoglu, 2012). Neither of these approaches, however,
explain by themselves why some Southeast Asian economies did better than others.
Adding a political variable to the growth equations does not help much because there are
many different kinds of politically motivated actions that can interfere with growth. The
kinds of politics we are interested in the first part of this paper are what I label as extreme
politics that lead either to great instability (including war) or involve predatory or extreme
ideologically driven governments. Both kinds make sustained economic growth difficult,
if not impossible. In the latter part of this paper, we will explore some of the other reasons
for the differences in performance of Southeast Asia economies at times when extreme
political actions were not involved.
To identify how extreme politics influenced economic growth, our approach is to briefly
review the political histories of each of the countries in the region. The role of politics in this
analysis focuses on the motives, beliefs and ideologies of individual leaders and ruling
elites and how they responded to different challenges – particularly, but not exclusively,
challenges from those they were attempting to govern. As we go through the histories of
the various Southeast Asian countries, it is useful to keep in mind the comparative
experience of Northeast Asia, where from at least 1960 onwards, with the notable
exception of China, none of these economies (Japan, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Hong
Kong) experienced sustained political instability that significantly interfered with
economic growth. In China’s case, the same can be said only for the period beginning
in 1978.
Countries 1960 2019
Brunei 87,657 62,100
Singapore 5,796 97,341
Malaysia 3,076 28,364
Thailand 1,621 18,460
Philippines 2,935 8,908
Indonesia 1,831 11,812
Vietnam** 1,460 8,041
Laos** 1,799 7,826
Cambodia** 1,764 4,389
Myanmar 489 5,142
Rep Korea 1,390 42,879
China** 598 16,117
India 1,028 6,700
Note(s): *Purchasing power parity estimates using the PPP methodology are not available before 1990. These
estimates for 1960 and other earlier years were derived in effect by assuming that the GDP per capita in 2017
PPP international prices was the same as the per capita GDP growth rate in constant 2010 US dollars. The
Myanmar estimate for 1960 is unreliable
**Vietnam and Laos are for 1983–1984, Cambodia is for 1993 and China for 1978
Source(s): World Bank (2021)
Table 1.
Per capita GDP (PPP
2017 international $)*
FREP
1,1
6
Three countries with sustained economic growth
We will start with the two highest income countries in the region (excluding Brunei),
Singapore and Malaysia, and then move on to Thailand, the third. Malaysia and particularly
Singapore were the richest countries in Southeast Asia at the time of their independence
largely because they had experienced a steady expansion in the production and export of
rubber and tin during the colonial period. The colonial government had built what for the
time was good infrastructure, with excellent port facilities in Singapore, paved roads in
Malaya, electric power and even potable water supplies, at least in the cities (Shah, 2017).
The years of the Emergency (1945–1957) limited investment, but Malaya still benefited from
the Korean War boom in rubber and tin prices. When the Emergency ended, Malaya (and
later Malaysia) enjoyed uninterrupted political stability from that point onwards, with the
notable exception of the 1969 “riots”. However, this event, which led to the New Economic
Policy (NEP), only disrupted the economy for a few months. The NEP bought with it decades
of political peace as the United Malay National Organization (UMNO), along with its smaller
allied parties, dominated the government for the next nearly five decades. Reasonably
honest elections were held and leaders changed, although Mahathir Mohamed was Prime
Minister from 1981 to 2003. The economy remained open with liberal trade policies and
welcomed the foreign direct investment (FDI). There were, however, biases in policies that
favored Malays over other ethnic groups; there were also policy mistakes and there was
increasing corruption, particularly among the political elite. There was nothing, however,
that seriously interrupted a stable environment for FDI that accounted for most exports and
much of GDP growth.
Singapore, as noted, inherited the infrastructure and free trade policies of what had for a
long time been the major port of Southeast Asia. Unlike Malaysia, its population was
predominantly Chinese, and the communist insurgency had strong support among many of
these Chinese Singaporeans. After the insurgency had been defeated, there remained a
contest between the more radical factions of the emerging political groups and a group that
was more “conservative”, albeit still socialist. That contest was in turn partly related to the
division between those who had been in Singapore for generations and spoke English and
those who primarily spoke one of the Chinese dialects (mainly Cantonese, Hakka and Hokien).
When this author first visited Singapore in 1962, it was not at all clear which of these factions
would win out. Labor strikes were common. To simplify a more complex process, the basic
fight for control mainly occurred within the People’s Action Party (PAP), with the more
“conservative” faction led by Lee Kuan Yew winning out in part with the help of the British
colonial government. The British Crown Colony ended in 1963 when Singapore became a
province of Malaya, but it was then expelled from Malaya and became an independent
country in 1965. During this period of political turmoil from 1960 to 1965, Singapore’s GDP
still grew at a respectable 6% a year. With full independence, however, it jumped to an annual
rate of 12.5% over the next eight years (World Bank, 2021).
From 1965 onwards, Singapore has experienced uninterrupted rule by a PAP dominated
first by Lee Kuan Yew and then his handpicked successor and most recently his son. The
government is democratic in the sense that it holds elections in which the votes are honestly
counted and there is opposition, but there are many constraints on the opposition that make
the system inherently more authoritarian than democratic. From the viewpoint of economic
growth, the government has systematically supported pro-economic growth policies together
with a substantial social welfare program. State-owned enterprises have also been supported,
although they have been expected to compete in much the same way as private companies.
For example, Singapore Airlines, one of the most successful carriers in the world, is a stateowned enterprise, but it still competes on all routes with numerous other airlines since
Singapore has no domestic air transport. Open-economy free trade policies have never been
challenged, although there is some government-targeted support for particular sectors. It is
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
7
doubtful that there is any country in the world that has maintained such a consistent a set of
growth-oriented and efficiently implemented politics over such a long period.
Thailand is the one other country of Southeast Asia that has experienced long periods of
substantial economic growth. It is also the only country in the region that was never a colony
of a European or any other power. Thailand’s absolute monarchy became a constitutional
monarchy in 1932, and in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, the government
was run by a military dictatorship until 1973. After that, it became a kind of parliamentary
democracy that saw changing parties and prime ministers in part through elections but also
occasionally through military coups. Thailand has had many military coups, but most of
them have involved little violence or economic disruption. This system has produced a
reasonably stable environment for investment and economic growth. There was no years of
negative growth between 1960 and 1996 when GDP growth and growth per capita averaged
7.6 and 5.3%, respectively – a high rate by any measure. The Asian financial crisis of 1997–
1998 began in Thailand and resulted in a 12% fall in per capita GDP. The economy took threeplus years to recover to the per capita GDP level of 1996. The years from 1997 onwards were
dominated by the populist political parties of Thaksin Shinawatra and his sister and the army
coups that removed them from office in 2006 and 2014, respectively. GDP and GDP per capita
growth fell sharply from 7.6 to 5.3%, respectively, from 1961 through 1996 to 3.0 and 2.6%
during the populist and coup years of 1997 through 2013. Growth continued at that slower
pace through 2019 before falling 6.5% in 2020 due to the coronavirus (World Bank, 2021). The
political instability arising from a political divide between the interests of the ruling elites and
residents of Bangkok, on the one hand, and Thais in most of the rest of the country who
supported the populist parties, on the other, probably accounts for most of this slowdown.
That said, there has been no time in Thailand from the 1950s onwards when the country
experienced periods of many years with stagnant or negative growth. Political instability and
corruption have been a problem for the economy but not to the degree that has characterized
the following Southeast Asian countries.
Six countries where war and politics led to long periods of stagnation
The Philippines, the next richest country in the region after Malaysia and Singapore
(excluding Brunei) at the time of its independence, is the first example in this paper of how
extreme politics can seriously interrupt economic development. In the immediate postindependence years, democratic elections produced a series of presidencies that dealt with
recovery from Japanese occupation during the Second World War, but these were soon facing
a major Communist-led insurgency. Despite that, the country did experience some economic
growth, and Ferdinand Marcos, when he was elected president in 1965, pursued a vigorous
debt-financed infrastructure program that helped him to be elected for a second term.
In this second term, however, there was inflation and social unrest that led Marcos to
declare martial law in 1972. From that point onward, the economic situation began to
deteriorate as Marcos pursued activities designed to generate funds for himself and his
associates. The degree to which banks and other institutions were hollowed out was covered
up with false statistics, but per capita GDP growth continued through 1980. If the estimates
are reliable, growth continued at a respectable 2.5% a year. From 1981 onward, however,
inflation was rampant, and the economy declined rapidly, falling by almost 18% per capita
through 1986 (World Bank, 2021). The People Power Revolution drove him from office in
1986, so he fled the country, and Corazon Aquino was elected as the president. The Aquino
years were mostly occupied with recovering from the debt and deterioration of the Marcos
years but were also plagued by military coup attempts that undermined investor confidence.
GDP growth was negative in both 1991 and 1992. From that point onward, however, under
several presidencies and more than a few crises, GDP grew at an average rate of 5% per year
FREP
1,1
8
and per capita GDP grew at an annual rate of 2.9%, more than doubling per capita income
(World Bank, 2021). Put differently, the Marcos kleptocracy and its unstable political
aftermath cost the Philippines roughly 20 years of per capita growth – per capita GDP in 1977
was not surpassed until 1997. In other words, total GDP during these two decades just kept up
with the comparatively high population growth rate of 2.05% per year over the same period.
Economic growth in Indonesia in the late 1990s had some features in common with the
Marcos years in the Philippines, but the impact of extreme kleptocratic politics on the
Indonesian economy was short-lived by comparison. The major political drag on the economy
occurred in the first two decades after Indonesia declared independence from the Dutch in
1945. That led the Dutch to try to hold on militarily until they were forced to recognize
Indonesian independence in late 1949. During the presidency of Sukarno, however, the
president and the government were primarily occupied with international political affairs that
included driving the Dutch and most other foreign investors out of Indonesia. They also
declared war on Malaya in an attempt to prevent the states of northern Borneo (Sabah and
Sarawak) from being incorporated into the new Malaysia. They also declared war again with
the Dutch over the western half of New Guinea. The period ended with the bloodbath of 1965,
which was connected with the long contest for power between the Indonesian communists and
the army. Per capita GDP in the early 1960s was probably no higher than it was in the 1950s or
the 1920s. The first few years of military rule mainly involved recovery from the chaos of 1965,
and there was a brief debt crisis in the 1970s when Indonesia borrowed heavily on the
assumption that oil prices would continue to climb and then invested these funds poorly.
The only subsequent political action that had a major negative impact on GDP growth
was the rising corruption of the Suharto family and associates in the 1990s after President
Suharto decided in 1992 for another term in office. That rising corruption and increasing
public and private debt, much of it borrowed in foreign currencies, caught up the country in
the Asian financial crisis. That in turn engulfed Indonesia in a political crisis with the fall of
Suharto, transition to democracy and early years of democratic rule that mainly involved
recovery from the decline in the economy. Per capita GDP did not recover to the 1997 level
until 2004. In effect, seven years of growth were lost (but democracy was gained) to go with
the 20-plus years lost in the immediate post-independence decades. In contrast, during the
politically stable years of 1968–1996, GDP and GDP per capita grew at 6.4 and 4.4%,
respectively. From 2005 to 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic, GDP and GDP per capita
grew at a slower but still substantial rate of 5.5 and 4.1%, respectively (World Bank, 2021).
These periods of substantial growth will be discussed later in this paper.
The three countries of Indochina gained full independence from France in 1953 and 1954–
Cambodia and Laos peacefully, Vietnam only after a protracted war that left the country split
into two. That, in turn, led to a war that eventually led to the unification of the two parts of
Vietnam in 1975. However, the leadership of the unified Vietnam then chose to attempt to
impose a complete Soviet-style centrally planned command economy including collectivized
agriculture on the south (the system already existed in the north). This effort failed, and in the
process of failing, it in effect made sustained economic growth impossible. The political
leadership of Vietnam changed in 1986, but sustained economic growth did not begin until a
dramatic change in the economic system began to be implemented in 1989. Laos and
Cambodia were unable to keep from being dragged into the war in Vietnam. Cambodia then
experienced the genocide of the Khmer Rouge that was ended by an invasion by Vietnam.
Sustained economic growth in Cambodia did not begin until the country abandoned a Soviettype system and replaced it with a market system in 1995. Growth in Laos may have started
earlier. Overall, the countries of Indochina attained sustained GDP growth only from the end
of the 1980s [1]. For the 30 years through 2019, and before the pandemic, the political systems
of all three countries have been stable and grown rapidly, although for very different reasons
that will be discussed later.
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
9
The Myanmar economic experience belongs in a category of its own. To begin with,
economic data produced by the military governments that ruled Myanmar from 1962 to 2011 are
highly suspect. This is particularly the case for data covering the 1992–2011 period that showed
per capita GDP rising at nearly 9% a year (World Bank, 2021). There was hardly any
manufacturing in Myanmar during that period beyond rice mills and a few textile and garment
producers. Officially, exports were less than one percent of GDP because of the international
embargo on trade with the country. Exports of items such as precious stones (rubies, jade, etc.)
were large but most were smuggled out of the country and did not appear in the official statistics.
The history of Burma/Myanmar also makes it clear that there was little if any economic
growth after the time of independence from British colonial rule in 1948. The civilian
government of U Nu introduced Burmese socialism, which had the immediate effect of ending
economic growth. In 1962, the military took over the government in a coup and military rule
continued uninterrupted until the election of 2015, although preparations for a return to
partial civilian rule began in 2011. The military spent most of their time in power fighting the
various minority groups (Shan, Kachin, etc.) that made up nearly one-third of the country’s
population. The military and civilians close to it were unusually corrupt. In 2012,
Transparency International ranked Myanmar’s level of corruption at No. 172 out of 176
countries surveyed (Transparency international, 2012). After 2011, the government did
manage to arrange truces in fighting with most of the minority groups except the Kachin in
the north of the country. Growth also began as the embargo was lifted and FDI began to pour
in. The World Bank’s estimates of GDP growth and GDP per capita growth in 2012–2019 of
6.6 and 5.8%, respectively, are plausible. If there was any growth in per capita GDP before
2012, it was likely siphoned off by the military, cronies and smugglers. Per capita income
growth for over 80% of the population was effectively nonexistent.
To summarize this discussion of the impact of extreme predatory politics and war on
economic growth in Southeast Asia, six of the nine countries (the ASEAN countries minus
Brunei) experienced long periods of no or negative growth due to predatory politics and war.
Only three countries – Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand – avoided long sustained
interruptions of that kind. The estimates in Table 2 give a quantitative picture of the impact of
these sustained interruptions in growth on the overall increase in per capita GDP in the nine
major countries of Southeast Asia. Malaysia had the slowest GDP per capita growth rate of the
three countries that avoided long-stagnant periods. Nevertheless, Malaysia still achieved more
than a ninefold increase in per capita. Thailand grew over elevenfold, but it had started with
only half the per capita income of Malaysia and so had only caught up to 65% of Malaysia’s
per capita GDP. The Philippines had slower growth than most other countries during the 20th
century and also had two decades of no growth. As a result, Philippine GDP per capita –
almost equal to that of Malaysia in 1960 – fell to less than one-third of Malaysian GDP by 2019.
The Indochina countries grew more rapidly than the others, but only after the end of the long
wars of independence and reunification, and so they were still well behind in terms of per
capita income. Myanmar is an extreme case. Despite what the official figures indicate, there
was little increase after independence in the per capita income of the great majority of the
population. If there was a significant increase in GDP, it was probably almost entirely
absorbed by the army and its close civilian associates. The GDP growth illustrates clearly the
impact of stagnant years on the growth of the countries of Southeast Asia (Table 2).
Differences in economic performance not due to war or extreme predatory
governments
While war and the extreme predatory behavior of some Southeast Asian governments
explain much of the observed differences in performance of these nine countries, they clearly
do not explain all the differences. Singapore grew faster for a longer period than any of the
FREP
1,1
10
others. If one were to focus only on when Singapore was still at a middle-income level and
experiencing catch-up growth (between 1960 and 1990), per capita GDP grew at 6.6 per year.
Only the governments of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos came anywhere close to that
Singapore catch-up growth rate (Table 2). These three Indochina economies, however,
started from a low per capita income that made possible a longer period and possibly a
higher rate of catch-up growth feasible. All countries that have experienced rapid catch-up
growth begin to experience a slowing of the GDP growth rate long before they fully catch up
to the per capita incomes of the high-income countries. Singapore experienced such a
slowdown in per capita GDP growth in the late 1980s. Malaysia, in the late 1990s, also
reached a level of per capita GDP at which many other countries stop growing at high catchup growth rates [2]. None of the other countries in the region (except for Brunei) have yet
reached per capita GDP, whereby a slowdown of this kind might be expected [3]. Vietnam,
because it started later and from a low per capita income, may experience high catch-up
growth for another two decades.
A systematic explanation of why several Southeast Asian economies have grown
somewhat faster than others during periods when major political disruptions were absent is
well beyond what can be accomplished in this paper. Instead, we will give a broad-brush
picture of some of the reasons why most Southeast Asian economies have grown rapidly in
comparison to many developing countries but fallen short of the sustained very high growth
rates of economies such as South Korea and Taiwan (and Singapore). We will start with a
general picture of what most of the growth accounting exercises tell us.
Stagnant Growth GDP p.c
Index GDP per capita
Years Years 1960 5 100
Growth Years %
per year
Singapore None 1961–2019 4.9 1680
Malaysia None 1961–2019 3.8 922
Thailand None 1961–2019 4.2 1139
Indonesia 1961–1967 1968–2019 3.6 645
Philippines 1981–2001 1960–1980 2.4
2002–2019 3.9 303
Vietnam 1961–1988 1989–2019 5.5 519
Laos 1961–1988 1989–2019 5 458
Cambodia 1961–1994 1995–2019 5.6 395
Myanmar 1961–2011 2012–2019 5.8 157
Note(s): Stagnant years are defined as years with little or no growth over a sustained period of many years.
The term does not include a recession of one or two years in length. The GDP per capita growth rate is only for
the years during which there was sustained growth, not growth over the entire period since 1960
The Index for growth in GDP per capita for most countries is obtained by dividing GDP per capita in 2019 with
that in 1960. However, WDI online for Vietnam and Laos only reports GDP per capita in constant local currency
prices beginning in 1984, and growth in these countries did not begin until several years later, so the index is
2019 per capita GDP over 1988 per capita GDP. For Cambodia, it is GDP per capita in 2019 over 1994
WDI online reports GDP per capita for Myanmar going back to 1960, but the data for 1991 - 2011 indicating a
per capita GDP growth rate of 8.8% per year is completely implausible. There is ample reason to believe that the
Myanmar military falsified the GDP estimates for most of the years that they were in power until they began to
make way for some degree of civilian rule in 2011. In further support of this view, David Dapice, in a personal
communication, stated that in a meeting with the Minister/General in charge of statistics in the very early
2000s, he queried how Myanmar’s GDP growth was so high when his calculations of growth in major products
were so much lower. The General replied that that was because Senior General Than Shwe (then the dictator of
the country) had stated what the GDP growth should be, and the General made it happen. For Myanmar, the
growth rate and index reflect GDP per capita growth rate only from 2010 to 2019
Source(s): WDI, World Bank (2021)
Table 2.
Stagnant years impact
on growth
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
11
Growth accounting exercises are estimated in a variety of different ways, making
comparisons difficult. The growth that is explained can be GDP growth in constant prices,
per capita or per worker. The data sets used to make these estimates can also vary,
particularly when it comes to studies that compare large numbers of countries. In addition,
the periodization used in presenting the data can vary considerably. Most of the multicountry studies present data decade by decade, thus obscuring the impact of major policy
reform periods that seldom fit a decade-by-decade pattern. The growth accounting data
referred to in this study of Southeast Asia are for the most part based on individual country
studies that measured the sources of GDP or GDP per capita growth using data from
individual countries’ statistical offices and adjusted for known biases and gaps.
Total factor productivity growth
The first point to note about these studies is that most estimated that total factor productivity
(TFP) played a small role in the growth of Southeast Asian economies. Singapore during its
high catch-up growth years (1965–1990) is the exception. It had on average the highest TFP
growth. In Southeast Asia, averaging a little less than 2% per year, although the rate
fluctuated above and below that number (Bercuson, 1995). TFP growth in Malaysia and
Thailand, in contrast, grew at around 1% a year over the entire post-1960 period covered in
this study (Perkins et al., 2021). Indonesian TFP grew hardly at all from the period of recovery
from the Sukarno years up to the present, although there may have been a period of positive
TFP growth during the reform efforts of the 1980s and early 1990s (Van der Eng, 2006).
In Thailand, TFP growth was a bit faster than 1% up through 1996, but not when one includes
the financial crisis of 1997–1998 (Bosworth, 2005). Because this crisis in Thailand was a direct
result of the preceding boom and due to the way that boom was financed and the macroeconomic
policy failures of the Thai government, it makes sense to include that period in any estimate of the
overall performance of the Thai economy. Much the same can be said about estimates for the
Malaysian economy. For Malaysia and Indonesia, the impact of the 1997–1998 financial crisis was
in part caused by external events, but most of all it resulted from local investors borrowing
heavily in foreign currencies without hedging against foreign exchange rate risks. Governments
followed macroeconomic policies to accommodate these practices until they ran out of foreign
exchange reserves, the exchange rates fell and widespread bankruptcies ensued.
Vietnam’s rapid TFP growth in the first half of the 1990s was due almost entirely to
increases in efficiency made possible by dismantling the Soviet-style command system in
favor of a market-based system. China experienced something similar in the 1980s when it
dismantled the Soviet command system in favor of a market system. But for 15 years
beginning in the mid-1990s, Vietnam experienced little TFP growth – well under 1% a year.
Then, after 2010, TFP averaged over 2% per year until the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 (Anh
and Perkins, 2022). The Philippines from 1980 to 2000 had no growth in GDP per capita, and
given that there was investment in those years, TFP growth on average must have been
negative. Estimates of positive Philippine TFP growth, such as during the late 1980s, were
productivity increases due not from sustained growth but because of recovery from a deep
recession (in this case the ending of the Marcos-era predatory policies). Since the beginning of
the 21st century, however, the Philippines has experienced TFP growth a bit over 1% a year.
A 1% rate of TFP growth is better than the negative TFP growth that one has seen for
long periods in much of Sub-Saharan Africa and in the 1980s Latin America. It is significantly
less, however, than the higher TFP rates one saw during the high catch-up growth eras of
China and Korea (Bosworth & Collins, 2003). For the four best-performing economies in
Southeast Asia, therefore, one needs to look elsewhere, at the rate of investment and capital
formation, for what explains their relatively high GDP growth performance. The data on the
investment rate (gross domestic capital formation/GDP) are presented in Figure 1.
FREP
1,1
12
High investment rates
The investment rates for Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand were at very high levels (35 to
over 40% of GDP) throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s (Figure 1). The growth rates in
Malaysia and Thailand then fell sharply after 1996 due to the financial crisis. For Singapore,
this high rate went back to before the 1980s (there were nine years when the rate of
investment was over 40% of GDP) and that was the period when GDP per capita growth
annually averaged 6.2% a year. For Malaysia, the high investment rate of the 1980s and
1990s produced a very respectable increase in per capita GDP of 3.7% a year, but that rate
was below the rate of the 1960s and 1970s when the investment rate was lower. It was only
0.5% higher than the rate of per capita GDP growth after 1999 when the investment rate was
also much lower.
There is nothing mysterious about why the large increase in the rate of investment in
Malaysia did not produce a similarly large increase in the growth rate of GDP. The 1980s,
1990s were the years when Prime Minister Mahathir poured large investments into a heavy
industry program that was designed to produce a Malaysian automobile brand (Proton)
along with the mechanical components and steel for its cars. Furthermore, this drive was
designed to produce a political goal in the form of a heavy industry sector run by indigenous
(Bumiputra) Malaysians, not Chinese Malaysians, and so it started with a group of stateowned enterprises. There were few Bumiputra with experience in manufacturing in the
private sector, but through state-owned enterprises, the government could guarantee that
Bumiputra would play a major role. The inefficiency of the resulting state-owned enterprises
led to their privatization, albeit through private sales mainly to Bumiputra, most of whom had
to be lent large sums from the government for this purpose. Those policies in turn made
Malaysia vulnerable to the financial crisis that started soon after the crisis in Thailand. This
Malaysian heavy industry effort never succeeded in producing automobiles and related
industries that were internationally competitive.
The low return on investment experience in Thailand during the high-investment years
was similar to that in Malaysia, but the policy failures that produced it were different. A large
rise in the investment rate produced a high 4.7% GDP per capita growth rate, but it was only
0.1% higher than the rate of growth of the previous two decades when investment rates were
lower. When the investment rate fell after 1999, the rate of growth in per capita GDP fell more
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
Singapore
Malaysia
Thailand
Philippines
Vietnam
Indonesia
Source(s): World Bank (2021)
Figure 1.
Southeast Asian
investment rates
(GDCF/GDP)
1980–2019
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
13
than in Malaysia (from 4.7 to 3.4%). The period of high Thai investment rates produced a real
estate boom and bubble financed by heavy foreign borrowing. When the government ran out
of foreign exchange, from its efforts to keep the exchange rate from falling, the rate then
collapsed and the unhedged investors (indeed, most of the Thai investors) went bankrupt.
Vietnam experienced an investment boom during the first decade of the 21st century, and
that boom produced a per capita GDP growth rate of 5.6% – a high rate, but like Thailand and
Malaysia, slightly below the per capita growth rate of the previous and following decades.
That 2001–2010 decade was characterized by high levels of corruption and the continued
reliance on state-owned enterprises for much of the Vietnamese economy. The decade also
received a lower share of foreign direct investment than in either the previous or following
decade.
Indonesian investment reached 35% of GDP during the second decade of the 21st century,
and that produced a 4.1% increase in per capita GDP during that decade. But a somewhat
lower average investment rate during 1983–1997 produced a 4.7% annual increase in GDP.
The main difference between the two periods is that during the 1980s through the mid-1990s,
Indonesian government policy was focused on expanding internationally competitive
manufacturing and manufactured exports through deregulation measures. The share of
manufacturing and manufactured exports rose steadily. Between 1983 and 1996,
manufacturing rose from 13.4 to 25.6% of GDP and manufactured exports rose from 6.5 to
51.3% of total exports. After the financial crisis of 1997–1998, however, that effort came to an
end and the share of manufacturing in GDP declined. By 2019, this had fallen to 19.7%, and
manufactured exports as a share of total exports declined to 46.3%. Manufactured exports in
most of the other Southeast Asian countries, in contrast, ranged from 75 to over 90% of
exports (World Bank, 2021). Indonesia in the 21st century has relied more than the others on
natural resource and service sector growth. Neither of these sectors was likely to produce the
kinds of productivity growth that a country typically gets from the first phases of growth in
manufacturing. Politically, it was easier for Indonesian governments to sustain adequate
rates of GDP growth by relying on Indonesia’s comparative natural resource wealth. It would
have been politically more difficult to introduce the kinds of deregulation that would have
been required to support increases in FDI in manufacturing.
Finally, among the six largest Southeast Asian economies, the Philippines had the lowest
investment rate, with gross domestic capital formation as a percentage of GDP often falling
below 20% and never rising above 25%. The lower investment rate, combined with the
predatory practices of the Marcos years leading to a long period of recovery from those
practices, largely accounts for the slow Philippine growth rate. The rapid growth of the first
two decades of the 21st century is partly explained by an investment rate that rose steadily
from under 20% of GDP at the beginning of the century to 25% during the second decade.
Given the populist nature of the Philippine government during this latter period, it remains to
be seen whether this recent growth and investment rate can be sustained.
Foreign direct investment
There is a widespread view that rapid growth in much of Southeast Asia was made possible
not only by a high rate of investment but particularly by a high rate of FID out of total
investment. This compares, for example, with much of Northeast Asia (Japan, Korea and
Taiwan), where FDI played a small role (China and Hong Kong being notable exceptions).
This impression, however, is only partly true as the data in Figure 2 make clear.
FDI is a large part of Singapore’s economic growth story, having been a large share of
Singaporean gross investment since independence and accounting for a large majority of
Singaporean investment in the 21st century. Singapore, like Hong Kong, pursued policies
designed to make the country the hub for foreign companies in Southeast Asia. Its success
FREP
1,1
14
in achieving that objective is clear. There are both successful domestically owned and
state-owned companies in Singapore, but growth has been driven by a combination of
foreign investment supported by a friendly regulatory environment and heavy
government investments in arguably the best infrastructure in the region, if not
the world.
The only other Southeast Asian nations where FDI has been a large share of investment
and GDP – although nowhere near as large as Singapore – are Malaysia and Vietnam. In both
countries, FDI-invested enterprises have accounted for most manufactured exports, and
hence most of the foreign exchange earnings of the two economies. In neither country have
domestic private firms been major competitors with the FDI firms. In Malaysia, domestic
private firms have had to meet the Bumiputera ownership requirements imposed by the New
Economic Policy instituted after the Malay riots of May 13, 1969. These requirements have
been barriers to their ability to develop to a point at which they are internationally
competitive and can export their products. FDI firms have typically been controlled or owned
by large multinationals, and in contrast to domestic firms, they typically started as exporting
firms and thus were exempt from Bumiputera ownership requirements. Vietnam has had a
similar experience but for different reasons. To attract FDI firms, these were given special
privileges early on. Domestic private firms of any size, in contrast, have faced many obstacles
from a government that has strongly favored state-owned enterprises partly on ideological
grounds and partly because these have kept large resources in the hands of the government
and the Vietnamese Communist Party.
Laos, Cambodia and Myanmar have also attracted FDI, but only in the twenty-first
century when some FDI firms, including Chinese firms, were looking to find alternative
locations for labor-intensive manufacturing previously located in China. Investments in
natural resources and real estate have also been common. The Myanmar military coup of
February 2021 will probably limit FDI in that country, particularly if sanctions on trade are
reimposed. FDI in Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines has seldom been more than 1 to
2% of GDP. FDI share in manufactured exports, due largely to investments from Japan, has
been much higher than the share in GDP. FDI in all of Southeast Asia has had a larger impact
on growth than its share of GDP, largely through the demonstration effect of FDI firms’ more
advanced technologies and management practices.
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
Singapore
Malaysia
Thailand
Indonesia
Philippines
Vietnam
Cambodia
Lao PDR
Myanmar
Source(s): World Bank (2021)
Figure 2.
Southeast Asian net
inflows of foreign
direct investment (as
% of GDP) 1970 –2019
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
15
Corruption and the regulatory environment
Extreme predatory behavior by Southeast Asian governments had largely ended by the 21st
century, with the exception of Myanmar’s leaders. Some governments in the region have still
continued to put up barriers to enterprise growth of a less extreme nature, however. The
World Bank and Transparency International have been attempting to measure these barriers
over the past two decades. Their estimates for several years are presented in Tables 3 and 4.
The first thing to note is that, with the exception of Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand, the
other countries of Southeast Asia are difficult places to do business because of the regulatory
environments imposed by their governments. With the exception only of Singapore,
Southeast Asian nations are also very corrupt. The correlation between excessive
Countries 2020 2006
Singapore 2 2
Malaysia 12 21
Thailand 21 20
Brunei 66 n/a
Vietnam 70 99
Indonesia 73 115
Philippines 95 113
Cambodia 144 133
Laos 154 147
Myanmar 165 n/a
Korea 5 27
Japan 29 10
China 31 91
Hong Kong 3 7
India 63 116
Taiwan 15 35
Total 190 155
Source(s): World Bank (2005, 2020)
2020 2007 1998
Singapore 3 4 7
Malaysia 57 43 29
Thailand 104 84 61
Philippines 115 131 55
Vietnam 104 123 74
Indonesia 102 143 80
Cambodia 160 162 n/a
Laos 134 168 n/a
Myanmar 137 n/a n/a
Brunei 35 n/a n/a
Japan 19 17 25
Taiwan 28 34 29
South Korea 33 43 43
China 78 72 52
India 86 72 66
Total ranked 183 181 86
Source(s): Transparency International (1998, 2007, 2020)
Table 3.
Ease of doing business
ranking
Table 4.
Transparency
international
corruption index
rankings
FREP
1,1
16
government regulation and corruption is not an accident. The more regulations a country has,
the more opportunities there are for corrupt practices. Malaysia and Thailand are the only
two countries in the region where it is comparatively easy to do business, and yet they are still
ranked as quite or very corrupt. In the case of Malaysia, this may be because FDI firms are
relatively free from corrupt government intervention, whereas some domestic investment is
not. Many politicians in Malaysia use the Bumiputera laws, among others, to generate rents
for themselves. The impact of this has been to slow growth below its full potential and to
make the country dependent on FDI firms to provide manufactured exports. For Thailand,
the high level of corruption probably accounts in part for the political instability of recent
years. In both Malaysia and Thailand, however, the regulatory system overall provides a
favorable climate for most businesses. For Malaysia at least, most of the corruption that is
harmful to the economy appears to be in government-sponsored infrastructure development.
Myanmar, as already noted, is ranked as being very corrupt and the worst country in
Southeast Asia – and one of the worst in the world – for doing business. It has been reported
in the press that a major motivation for the February 2021 army coup was the desire on the
part of the army to protect its corrupt rent-producing investments. Cambodia and Laos are
also ranked among the worst countries for doing business and among the most corrupt. How
then is it that, over the past two decades, their GDP per capita has grown rapidly? Both are
among the smallest countries in Asia, with populations of 16 million and 7 million,
respectively. A large share of their populations (75 and 65%, respectively) are subsistence
farmers, and literacy is low – only about a third of Cambodia’s population has completed
primary school and only 6% (in 2009) has completed secondary school (World Bank, 2021).
Growth in the two countries, as a result, has come mainly from FDI, not from domestic
businesses. Many Chinese manufacturers of labor-intensive textiles, garments and shoes
have moved their operations to Cambodia, presumably to take advantage of lower labor
costs. FDI in Laos, in contrast, has gone into large hydroelectric projects that are built by
Thailand and supply electricity mainly to their western neighbor. Laos receives rent from
these activities, but it also must buy back from Thailand whatever electricity it uses. Laos
also has a high-speed railway connecting it with China, built entirely by Chinese companies.
Chinese companies do not have to contend with an equivalent of the US Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act and can deal with Cambodian and Laotian regulatory and corruption barriers
as simply a cost of doing business there. Vietnamese companies harvest large amounts of
timber from Laotian forests, but it is not clear how much of this enters the official Laotian
government statistics. An even larger illegal trade is in drugs, mainly from the “golden
triangle” that includes both Laos and Myanmar. These drugs do not enter the GDP
statistics for either country, but the services they purchase with drug money do. In
Cambodia, there is also large and growing legal revenue from tourism that does involve
domestic companies to some extent. The main positive aspects of the Cambodian and
Laotian business environments are that their governments, unlike Myanmar, are
reasonably stable and they abandoned Soviet-style planning in favor of market
economies two decades ago. That said, most of the people of Laos are subsistence
farmers and very little of the GDP growth ends up benefiting Laotians. Much the same can
be said about Cambodia. A large share of the benefits of FDI goes to the foreigners who
make the investment and to Cambodian politicians who oversee it. This is not likely to be an
effective long-run growth strategy.
Vietnam, Indonesia and the Philippines fall between the comparatively favorable business
environments of Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand and the extremely unfavorable ones of
Myanmar, and to a lesser degree, Cambodia and Laos. Vietnam, Indonesia and the Philippines
have also made significant progress in improving their regulatory environments and
reducing corruption. There is no way in this short paper to analyze for these three countries
the degree to which their business environments and corruption account for economic growth
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
17
that is below their full potential. There is little doubt, however, that corruption and poor
business environments are an important part of the story.
Conclusion
Government economic development policies are almost by definition driven by politics. The
fastest-growing economies of Northeast Asia achieved high growth rates through political
decisions that gave a near-absolute priority to measures that promoted growth. Political
considerations that interfered with that priority were rejected. Rent-seeking and corruption,
for example, existed in countries such as Korea, but rent-seeking interests were not allowed to
influence industrial policy decisions, at least not during the first three decades of high growth.
The same cannot be said about the nations of Southeast Asia, except for Singapore. The
central point of this paper is that political-driven policies of two kinds explain much of the
difference in the growth performance of Southeast Asian countries after the end of the Second
World War. First were the extreme politics that led to war and revolution, together with the
unusually predatory governments of Marcos in the Philippines, the military in Myanmar and
the Khmer Rouge. There were also the governments driven by ideology – the imposition of
Soviet-style centrally planned command economies in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. Then
there were the nearly two decades of Sukarno posturing on the international stage rather than
taking steps to improve the life of Indonesian people.
Once extreme politics were confined to the past, the second kind of politics continued to
play a large role, particularly if one includes rent-seeking as a political act. The desire for rents
had much to do with why the regulatory environment has been so unfavorable in many
Southeast Asian countries, although government distrust of private business practices was
also involved. Decisions to support or oppose FDI have also been, first and foremost, political,
particularly where domestic ownership is by minority ethnic Chinese. In Malaysia, it has been
a way to grow exports while still imposing stiff ownership-sharing requirements on ChineseMalaysian businesses. In Vietnam, it has partly been a decision to strengthen relations with
high-income market economies but not so much China. In Cambodia and Laos, relations with
China have largely dictated who the principal foreign investors are. Natural resource incomes
have made it possible for some politicians, such as the Myanmar army, to close themselves off
from the world.
Singapore under Lee Kuan Yew and the People’s Action Party, in contrast, understood
that to survive as a politically independent country – one surrounded by less than friendly
neighbors and a local population many of whom had supported the Communist insurgency –
it had to be an economic success that benefited most of its citizens. Singapore had that in
common with South Korea and Taiwan – two economies that knew their survival depended
on shared economic success. These economies are among the few in the developing world that
have reached their full catch-up economic growth potential by giving growth-oriented
policies an absolute priority.
Politics, of course, is not the whole story of Southeast Asia’s economic growth. There have
been fundamental differences in the level of education of populations due in part to different
colonial experiences and also differences between Confucian and non-Confucian cultures.
Tertiary-level education throughout the region, in particular, has been weak, with the
exception of Singapore. Investment rates, nevertheless, have been high enough to sustain
fairly high growth rates, despite the inefficiencies resulting from high levels of corruption and
politically motivated regulation.
The emphasis in this paper has been on how politics have distorted economic decisions
from what a technocratic high economic growth strategy would have dictated. On a positive
note, however, once the countries in the region managed to get beyond wars and revolutions,
it was the politicians who decided that economic growth was important and created policy
FREP
1,1
18
contexts that were sufficient to support high levels of investment. The difference between
most of Southeast Asia and Northeast Asia is that commitment to high investment and
growth has been less than absolute. It may seem obvious that governments in developing
countries would give high priority to policies that promote economic growth, but the world is
full of examples of governments that have given priority to other goals that have stifled
growth. Political leaders, who have long overstayed their welcome but are determined to hold
onto power, even if the methods used stifle economic growth, are found in many places. In
Southeast Asia, however, most political leaders have supported economic growth policies –
just not with the single-minded focus that occurred in Northeast Asian countries during their
high catch-up growth decades.
It is also true that some of the policies that at first glance appear to have slowed growth
may have helped create the sustained political stability that has allowed growth to continue.
Malaysia’s NEP, introduced after the May 1969 riots, is a case in point. For all of the negative
effects this policy sometimes had on domestic investment and growth, it also gave the
majority Malay population a stake in the country’s progress. Indonesian industrial policies
under the country’s 21st century democracy may be inferior to the technocratic industrial
policies of the 1980s and early 1990s. The government during this period, however, went on to
distort those technocratic policies for personal gain, which led to the economic and political
collapse of the regime. Few in the country would trade the democracy that followed for better
economic policies; democracy also appears to have created a more stable environment for
long-term investment.
Indonesia aside, this paper has not tried to answer the question of whether economic
growth depends ultimately on political systems that allow for full citizen participation in
governance – systems that are full democracies in some sense. In Southeast Asia, the only
country that can be considered a full democracy is Indonesia, and only for the two most recent
decades. The Philippines also comes close, in that contested elections are regularly held and
governments change from one party or part of the electorate to another. Malaysia and
Singapore also have contested elections where the votes are counted honestly, but the playing
field is heavily biased toward the existing ruling party, and only once in Malaysia and never
in Singapore has the ruling party lost an election. Thailand and Myanmar have elections, but
it is still the military more often than not that decides who will govern. Vietnam, Cambodia,
Laos and Brunei are unapologetically authoritarian. In Southeast Asia, there is no correlation
between economic growth performance and the degree of citizen participation in governance.
Finally, this paper has argued that sustained economic growth in Southeast Asia occurred
when there were long periods of political stability that created a stable environment for
investment. The paper has not argued that economic growth justifies the ways that political
stability has been achieved. As the Indonesian example illustrates, somewhat less growth but
more democracy can sometimes mean a higher level of human welfare. Most of the political
leaders of Southeast Asia, however, have not accepted that view.
Notes
1. The economy of South Vietnam may have achieved increases in GDP in the 1955–1972 period, but it
was growth generated by massive military and aid expenditures in the country by the United States
connected to the war effort.
2. There are estimates of when the GDP growth slowdown occurred for all countries that achieved high
income status. For most, this occurred when they reached between $10,000 and $16,000 per capita
GDP (Purchasing Power Parity year 2000 prices)
3. A slowdown due to poor policies can occur at any time, but the kind of slowdown noted here refers to
a slowdown that occurs because the country has reached a per capita income where catch-up growth
(e.g. growth by basically following the path laid down by leading high-income economies).
Political
influences in
Southeast Asia
19
Reference
Alesina, A., Ozler, S., Roubini, N., & Swagel, P. (1996). Political instability and economic growth. €
Journal of Economic Growth, 1(2), 189-211.
Anh, V.T.T., & Perkins, D.H. (2022). Explaining vietnam’s economic growth experience. unpublished
book chapter, in Ljunggren, B. and Perkins, D.H. (Eds), Vietnam: Navigating a Rapidly Changing
Economy, Society, and Political Order.
Bercuson, M.K. (1995). Singapore: a case study in rapid development, IMF Occasional Papers 1995/
018, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bosworth, B. (2005). Economic Growth in Thailand: The Macroeconomic Context a World Bank Project
on the Investment Climate, Firm Competitiveness, and Growth in Thailand, Washington, DC.
Bosworth, B., & Collins, S.M. (2003). The empirics of growth: An update. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2003(2), 113-206.
Perkins, D.H., Rasiah, R., & Woo, W.T. (2021). Explaining Malaysia’s past economic growth.
unpublished book chapter, in, Rasiah, R., Saleh, K. and Check, C.K. (Eds), Malaysia’s Leap into
the Future: Building Blocks, Springer, New York.
Robinson, J.A., & Acemoglu, D. (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and
Poverty Profile, London.
Shah, N. (2017). Charting the Economy: Early 20th Century Malaya and Contemporary Malaysian
Contrasts, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Transparency International (1998, 2007, 2012, 2020). Corruption Perceptions Index, Berlin.
Van der Eng, P. (2006). Accounting for Indonesia’s economic growth: Recent past and near future.
Seminar on World Economic Performance: Past, Present and Future–Long Term Performance
and Prospects of Australia and Major Asian Economies, on the Occasion of Angus Maddison’s
80th Birthday, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 5-6.
World Bank (2005, 2020). Ease of Doing Business Ranking, Washington, DC.
World Bank (2021). World Development Indicators, Washington, DC.
Corresponding author
Dwight Perkins can be contacted at: dwight_perkins@harvard.edu
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
FREP
1,1
20


